---
title: Ruby, the self keyword
author: david
date: 2022-05-12 11:33:00 +0800
categories: [ruby]
tags: [ruby]
pin: false
math: false
mermaid: false
image:
  path: https://res.cloudinary.com/bdavidxyz-com/image/upload/w_1600,h_836,q_100/l_text:Karla_72_bold:Ruby%20%20the%20self%20keyword,co_rgb:ffe4e6,c_fit,w_1400,h_240/fl_layer_apply,g_south_west,x_100,y_180/l_text:Karla_48:A%20simple%20article%20about%20Ruby,co_rgb:ffe4e680,c_fit,w_1400/fl_layer_apply,g_south_west,x_100,y_100/newblog/globals/bg_me.jpg
  lqip: data:image/webp;base64,UklGRpoAAABXRUJQVlA4WAoAAAAQAAAADwAABwAAQUxQSDIAAAARL0AmbZurmr57yyIiqE8oiG0bejIYEQTgqiDA9vqnsUSI6H+oAERp2HZ65qP/VIAWAFZQOCBCAAAA8AEAnQEqEAAIAAVAfCWkAALp8sF8rgRgAP7o9FDvMCkMde9PK7euH5M1m6VWoDXf2FkP3BqV0ZYbO6NA/VFIAAAA
  alt: Ruby, the self keyword
---

## What is self in Ruby

`self` is a reserved keyword in Ruby that always refers to the current object and classes are also objects, but the object `self` refers to frequently changes based on the situation or context. So if you're in an instance, `self` refers to the instance. If you're in a class, `self` refers to that class.


## self refers to the context

Yes, the context is where your code is at any given moment.

If your code is inside an instance method, `self` is an instance of that class. In other words, `self` is an object.

Let’s try that, and output `self`. In order to do that we need to add it somewhere inside the object. Any method would be good for that.

```ruby
def name
  puts self 
end
name
# => main
```

This code defines and calls a `.name` method which prints the value of self.

`self` is initially set to `main`, an instance of the Object class that is automatically created whenever a Ruby program is interpreted.

The main object is the "top-level" namespace of the program.

No matter which context the code finds itself, one important rule about `self` must be remembered: `self` always refers to one and only one object at any given time.

As seen here:

```ruby 
class Person
  def name
    puts self end
  end
Person.new.name 
#<Person:0x000056198a868c98>
```

From these examples, we can tell that the value of `self` changes depending on where you use it.

I believe you can understand anything better by understanding its purpose.

Let’s look at some examples. 


## Self, inside a Class definition

In a class definition (but not in an instance method), the `self` keyword refers to the class itself.

Here we have `Person` class, inside which we are outputting the value of `self`:

```ruby 
class Person
 puts self 
end
# => Person (the Person class)
```

The result is that, directly inside the context of a class definition, `self` is equivalent to the parent class in which it was defined; `Person`, in this case.

In **singleton methods**, the `self` keyword also refers to the class itself.

```ruby 
class Person
  def self.name
    puts self 
  end
end
Person.name
# => Person
```

**Why we use `self` in method definition?**

Let’s look at more common use case... Defining class methods ! 

**Class-Level Methods**

I’m sure you have seen it in above example. These `def self.method_name` method definitions.

Because we don’t have to use the class name for each method definition, making our code easier to change if we change the class.

That’s why we do `def self.name` instead of `def Person.name`.
  
Another more advanced way to do this is to define a method inside the Class instance itself. 

This is referred to as the *eigenclass* or the *singleton* class and it uses the `self` keyword to open a new context where the Class instance is held in self.

Let’s check with an example. 

```ruby
class Person
  class << self
    def name
      puts "Jane"
    end
  end
end
Person.name 
# => "Jane"
```


## Instance method : self

An _instance method_ is a method that applies to all instances of that class, but not for the class object itself.

In Ruby, defining a class instance method is as simple as excluding the `self`. Object prefix within the method definition; in this case, using just `def name` does the trick: 

```ruby
class Person
  def name
    puts "self inside method is: #{self}"
    puts "self.class is: #{self.class}"
    return "Jane"
  end
end
# Define instance
person = Person.new
person.name
# => self inside method is: #<Person:0x000000010c38be10>
# => self.class is: Person
# => "Jane"
```

Since this is an instance method, we can’t call it until we create a new instance of our `Person` class. After that, once we call the **name** method on that instance, we get the full output. 

Unlike a direct class method reference to self, an instance method reference to self actually points to the particular instance that is being executed, thus our output shows an instance of the `Person` class, as indicated by its memory address:

```ruby
# => self inside method is: #<Person:0x000000010c38be10>
```

## Self, inside a Module definition

The use of `self` inside a _module definition_ is very similar to that of a `class definition`. In fact, as far as Ruby is concerned, the reference to `self` doesn’t care whether you are in the context of a class, or a module, it will treat both basically the same.
For example, here we are enclosed our `Person` class inside the `Type` module, then output the value of selfwithin both contexts:

```ruby 
module Type
  puts "Self inside Type is: #{self}" 
  class Person
    puts "Self inside Type::Person is: #{self}" 
  end
end
```

While Ruby treats the _module definition_ call to `self` just as it did with the _class definition_, representing the parent level object of Type in this case, for the child call it recognizes that there’s a hierarchy here, so we get the module plus the class:

```ruby
Self inside Type is: Type
Self inside Type::Person is: Type::Person
```

## How `self` work when it not use with instance variable and method
When a method is called without an explicit `self`, the implicit `self` is used, which is the value of the `self` keyword. In the following example, the `Person#name` method uses the value from `Person#first_name` and `Person#last_name`, but does not explicitly use `self` and relies on the value of the implicit `self`.

```ruby
class Person

  attr_reader :first_name, :last_name
  
  def initialize(first_name, last_name) 
    @first_name = first_name @last_name = last_name
  end

  def name
    "#{first_name} #{last_name}"
  end 
end
```

Relying on the implicit `self` can save quite a bit of typing over time and is very common among Ruby programmers.

## Summary

- `self` is a keyword in Ruby representing the default object of the current context. 
- `self` is the default receiver of messages and the owner of instance variables.
- Three rules for determining `self`: 1) when the current context is outside of any _class_/_module_/_method_ definition, `self` is _main_; 2) when the current context is inside a _class_/_module_ definition and outside of _method_ definitions, `self` is the _class_/_module_; 3) when the current context is inside a _method_ definition, `self` is the receiver of the _method_, the object before _dot_(.).